The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mentor: Russian Music, Vol. 4, Num. 18,
Serial No. 118, November 1, 1916, by Henry T. Finck

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Mentor: Russian Music, Vol. 4, Num. 18, Serial No. 118, November 1, 1916

Author: Henry T. Finck

Release Date: May 3, 2016 [EBook #51993]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MENTOR: RUSSIAN MUSIC ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                    THE MENTOR 1916.11.01, No. 118,
                             Russian Music




                            LEARN ONE THING
                               EVERY DAY

                  NOVEMBER 1 1916     SERIAL NO. 118

                                  THE
                                MENTOR

                             RUSSIAN MUSIC

                           By HENRY T. FINCK
                        Author and Music Critic

                  DEPARTMENT OF             VOLUME 4
                  FINE ARTS                NUMBER 18

                         FIFTEEN CENTS A COPY




Several Natural Questions


Q.--How big is Russia, and what is its population?

A.--The area of Russia exceeds 8,660,000 square miles, or one-sixth
of the whole land surface of the earth. Its population is over
150,000,000--or at least it was so before the war.

Q.--How many famous Russian composers are there?

A.--Less than a dozen.

Q.--How old is Russian music?

A.--Less than 150 years. Catherine the Great (1761-1796) was one of the
first to encourage national music in Russia. Before her time the music
performed in Russia was imported, and was largely Italian. Catherine
caused productions of music by Russian composers. She supplied the
libretto for one opera.

Q.--What is the origin of Russian music?

A.--Both the music and literature of Russia had a common
origin--popular inspiration. The form and spirit of the music and
literature were drawn from the legends and primitive songs of the
people.

Q.--When did music in Russia become, in a real sense, national?

A.--Not until the first part of the nineteenth century. Composers had
been trying for fifty years to establish a national movement in music,
but it was not until the advent of Glinka and his opera, “A Life for
the Czar,” in 1836, that the Russian school of music can be said to
have been inaugurated.

Q.--Why were music and literature so late in coming to this great
nation?

A.--On account of physical and human conditions. Russia is and has
been a vast and absolute monarchy, consisting of millions of people
held in subjection and ignorance, and with only a few great centers
of civilization. Petrograd has been for years a city of brilliant
cultivation, but in contrast to that there are countless towns,
villages, and farms in which dwell millions of poor and ignorant
people. It is only within the last century that Russia has wakened
to a national consciousness and begun to shake off the grim, feudal
conditions of the Middle Ages. In this new era the voice of music is
first heard as a national expression.




[Illustration: MICHAL IVANOVICH GLINKA]




_RUSSIAN MUSIC_

_Michal Ivanovich Glinka_

ONE


Michal Ivanovich Glinka at an early age showed that he possessed two
characteristics that were to have a very important bearing on his
whole life--an extremely nervous disposition and a lively aptitude for
music. His grandmother, who was responsible for his early upbringing
and who was an invalid herself, encouraged the first; while his father
stimulated in the boy the second. Glinka, mollycoddled from childhood,
never wholly succeeded in throwing off an inherited brooding tendency;
but he became a wonderful composer and musician.

Glinka was born on June 2, 1803, at Novospassky, a little village in
Russia. His father was a retired army officer and not particularly well
off, but his mother’s brother was fairly wealthy, and often when the
Glinkas had an entertainment this brother lent them a small private
band which he kept up. It was to this early association with music of
the best class that young Glinka owed the development of his taste.

He spent his earliest years at home, but when he was thirteen he went
to a boarding school in Petrograd, where he remained for five years,
carefully studying music. It was in 1822, when he was only seventeen,
that he composed his first music--one of his five waltzes for the
piano. During these school years he paid attention to the other
branches of education also, learning Latin, French, German, English and
Persian, and working hard at the study of geography and zoölogy.

Glinka had a nervous breakdown in 1823, and he made a tour of the
Caucasus, taking a cure in the waters there. On his return home he
worked hard at his music, although as he had not then decided to devote
his life to a musical career, his studies were somewhat intermittent.
He went to Petrograd and took a position in the government department;
but in 1828 his family gave him an allowance and he decided to devote
himself to music alone. While at Petrograd he made many friends.
However, he saw that a round of pleasure did not aid him in his music,
so in 1830 he began his thorough musical education, leaving Russia for
Italy, where he stayed for three years studying the works of old and
modern Italian masters. His training as a composer was finally finished
in Berlin.

Glinka returned to Russia in 1833, and was soon the center of an
intellectual circle at Petrograd. It was one of these friends,
Joukovsky, the poet, who suggested that Glinka compose an opera on
the subject of the heroic patriotic deeds of the Russian hero, Ivan
Soussanin. Baron de Rosen wrote the libretto for this work, which was
called “A Life for the Czar,” and which was first performed on November
27, 1836.

The plot of this opera was based on the following story: In 1613 the
Poles invaded Russia and attempted to assassinate the newly elected
Czar, Michael Romanoff. The Polish leaders, however, did not know where
to find the Czar. Without letting him know who they were, they asked a
peasant, Ivan Soussanin, to guide them to the monarch. Ivan, however,
suspecting their designs, sent his adopted son to warn the Czar, and
himself led the Poles to the depths of a forest from which they could
not possibly find their way. The Poles, when they saw that they had
been deceived, killed Soussanin.

This opera was the turning point in Glinka’s life. It was a great
success, and in a way became the basis of a Russian school of national
music. The opera enjoyed extraordinary popularity. In December, 1879,
it reached its 500th performance, and in November, 1886, a special
production was given, not only at Petrograd, but in every Russian town
that had a theater, in celebration of the 50th anniversary of its first
performance. It was presented at two theaters in Moscow at the same
time.

Glinka had married in 1835, but misunderstandings arose which finally
ended in a separation some time afterward.

His second opera, “Ruslan and Ludmilla,” did not appear until 1842.
It did not appeal to the popular taste and was a dismal failure.
Glinka thought that it was superior to his first, and he was bitterly
disappointed at its failure.

In 1845 he made his first visit to Paris, and later he went to Spain.
After two years in that country he returned to Russia, where he spent
the winter at his home, and then went to Warsaw, remaining there for
three years. In 1852 Glinka started for France, paying another visit
to Berlin on the way. When, however, war broke out in the Crimea in
1854, he returned to Petrograd. While there he became interested in
church music. In order to study this type of music he went to Berlin in
1856. This was his last journey. Early in January, 1857, the composer
Meyerbeer arranged a special concert devoted to Glinka’s works. On
leaving the hall the Russian contracted a chill. He died on February
15, 1857. Glinka was buried in Berlin. Three months later, however, his
body was taken to its present resting place in Petrograd. A monument
was erected to his memory there in 1906.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 4, No. 18, SERIAL No. 118
    COPYRIGHT, 1916, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: ANTON RUBINSTEIN]




_RUSSIAN MUSIC_

_Anton Rubinstein_

TWO


There has been a curious uncertainty as to the date of Anton
Rubinstein’s birth. He was born on November 28, 1829, but due to
a lapse of memory on the part of his mother, he always celebrated
his birthday on the 30th of November. He was the son of a Jewish
pencil manufacturer at Wechwotynetz, Russia, who later went to
Moscow. In his autobiography Rubinstein tells of this migration: “My
earliest recollections are of a journey to Moscow in a roomy covered
wagon, undertaken by the three families, with all the children and
servants,--nothing less than a tribal migration. We reached the city
and crossed the Pokròvski bridge. Here we hired a large house belonging
to a certain Madame Pozniakòv; it was surrounded by trees and stood
near a pond beyond the river Iowza. This was in 1834 and 1835.”

The mother of Rubinstein was an excellent musician, and she gave the
young boy his first music lessons. In addition he had as a teacher a
master of the piano named Alexander Villoing. To the end of his life
Rubinstein declared that he had never met a better master.

When he was only ten years old Rubinstein made his first public
appearance as a performer, playing in a theater at Moscow. Two years
later he went to Paris, and roused the admiration of Liszt and Chopin
by his playing.

After this Rubinstein traveled for some time in Holland, Germany and
Scandinavia. In 1842 he reached England, where he made his first
appearance, on May 20th. He made a brief visit to Moscow in 1843, and
two years later went with his family to Berlin, in order to finish his
musical education. There he made friends with Mendelssohn.

Then Rubinstein’s father died suddenly. His mother and brother were
forced to return to Moscow. Anton went to Vienna to earn a living.
For nearly two years more he studied hard there, and then went on two
concert tours through Hungary. The Revolution broke out in Vienna and
prevented his return to that city, so he went to Petrograd, where he
studied, composed and lived pleasantly for the next few years.

About this time he came near being exiled to Siberia through an
unfortunate error of the police. He was saved from this by his
patroness, the Grand Duchess Helene.

He composed several operas during the next few years; and he visited
Hamburg and Leipzig and then went on to London, arriving there for the
second time in 1857. He remained there for a short time and reappeared
the following year, in the meantime having been appointed concert
director of the Royal Russian Musical Society. In 1862 he helped to
found the Conservatory at Petrograd. Of this he was director until 1867.

Rubinstein then traveled for some years, visiting America in 1872--a
tour which brought him $40,000. So popular was his playing that he
was afterward offered $125,000 for fifty concerts; but he could not
overcome his dread of the sea voyage. He returned to Russia from
America, and after a short rest continued his concert tours. For the
remaining years of his life he lived in turn at Petrograd, Berlin, and
Dresden, devoting his time to concerts, teaching, and to composition.
In 1885 he began a series of historical recitals, which he gave in
most of the chief European capitals. Rubinstein died near Petrograd on
November 20, 1894.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 4, No. 18, SERIAL No. 118
    COPYRIGHT, 1916, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: MODESTE PETROVICH MOUSSORGSKY]




_RUSSIAN MUSIC_

_Modeste Petrovich Moussorgsky_

THREE


Moussorgsky’s artistic creed might be summed up in one sentence--he
was devoted absolutely to the principle of “art for _life’s_ sake.”
This is quite the opposite of “Art for art’s sake.” Moussorgsky looked
on musical art not as an end in itself, but as a means of vital
expression. He was a full-blooded realist, and his music throbs with
life.

Modeste Petrovich Moussorgsky was born on the estate of his father at
Karevo on March 28, 1839. His father was a man of moderate means, and
the boy spent his first ten years in the country and in close touch
with the peasants. This early environment inspired his later feelings
of sympathy with the land and its people. Long before he could play the
piano he tried to reproduce songs that he heard among the peasants. His
mother was pleased at this, and began to give him lessons on the piano
when he was still a young child. At the age of seven he was able to
play some of the smaller pieces of Liszt. Sometimes he even improvised
musical settings for the fairy tales that his nurse told him.

In 1849 Moussorgsky and his brother were taken to Petrograd, where they
were entered in the military cadet school, for the boy was intended for
the army. At the same time, however, his parents allowed him to pursue
his musical education. Moussorgsky’s father died in 1853, and three
years later the youth entered his regiment. It was in 1857 that he
began to have a distaste for his military duties, and two years later
he resigned from the army. During the summer following his resignation,
however, he was unable to do any work with his music, as he was taken
sick with nervous trouble. Also from the time he left the army he was
never free from financial embarrassments.

Moussorgsky went to Petrograd, and he and five friends formed
themselves into an intellectual circle. He soon, however, began to feel
the pinch of poverty and was obliged to do some work of translation.
Later he even took a small government position. His mother died in
1865, and he wrote a song at the time which is now regarded as one
of his finest works. Toward the middle of this year he was once more
attacked by his nervous trouble. It was necessary for him to give up
his position and to go to live in the country. He improved gradually,
and during the next two years he wrote some songs which later attracted
some attention. Most of the year 1868 was spent in the country. In
the fall of this year he returned to Petrograd. He secured another
position, this one in the Ministry of the Interior. This left him with
some leisure, which he employed with his music. About this time he
began to work on the music of his opera, “Boris Godounov,” based on the
work of the dramatist Pushkin. This was first produced in Petrograd on
January 24, 1874. Shortly after he began to work on “Khovantchina,”
another opera, which had its first complete public performance in 1885
at Petrograd.

Shortly after the production of “Boris Godounov,” Moussorgsky began to
devote himself to the composition of songs, among which was the song,
“Without Sunlight,” and the “Songs and Dances of Death.”

Then Moussorgsky began to enter into a mental and physical decline.
He was low in funds, for the small salary derived from his
government position was insufficient for his needs. He began to play
accompaniments at concerts, but very little work of this kind was
obtainable. In 1879 he made a long concert tour in South Russia with
Madam Leonoff, a singer of repute. This was very successful. He did
very little work during the following winter; his health grew worse,
and he was forced to give up his government appointment. He lived for
a time in the country. At last it was necessary for him to enter the
military hospital at Petrograd, where he died on March 28, 1881. He was
buried in the Alexander Nevsky cemetery. Some years later a few friends
and admirers erected a monument over his grave.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 4, No. 18, SERIAL No. 118
    COPYRIGHT, 1916, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: PETER ILICH TCHAIKOVSKY]




_RUSSIAN MUSIC_

_Peter Ilich Tchaikovsky_

FOUR


Peter Ilich Tchaikovsky in the first part of his life held an office in
the Ministry of Justice at Petrograd. While he was an excellent amateur
performer, he did not think seriously enough of his musical ability to
consider music as a career. It was Anton Rubinstein who induced him to
take up music as a profession.

Tchaikovsky was born at Votkinsk, Russia, on May 7, 1840. He was the
son of a mining engineer, who shortly after Peter was born removed
to Petrograd. The boy picked up a smattering of musical knowledge
as a law student. Then when he was twenty-two, Rubinstein, the
director of the conservatory at Petrograd, persuaded him to enter
it as a pupil. Tchaikovsky, therefore, resigned his position in the
Ministry of Justice and took up the study of composition, harmony, and
counterpoint. Four years later, on leaving the conservatory, he won the
prize, a silver medal, for his cantata on Schiller’s “Ode to Joy.”

In 1866 Tchaikovsky became professor of the history and theory of
music at the Moscow Conservatory, which had just then been founded by
Nicholas Rubinstein, a brother of Anton. For the next twelve years he
was practically first chief of this conservatory, since Serov, whom
he succeeded, never took up his appointment. While serving in that
capacity he wrote text books and made translations of others into
Russian.

At Moscow Tchaikovsky met Ostrovsky, who wrote for him his first
operatic libretto, “The Voyevoda.” The Russian Musical Society
rejected a concert overture by Tchaikovsky, written at the suggestion
of Rubinstein. In 1867 Tchaikovsky made an unsuccessful début as a
conductor. His star was not yet in the ascendant, for in 1869 his
opera, “The Voyevoda,” lived for only ten performances. Tchaikovsky
later destroyed the score of this work. The following year his operatic
production, “Undine,” was rejected. In 1873, at Moscow, his incidental
music to the “Snow Queen” proved a failure. During all this time the
composer was busy on a cantata, an opera and a text book of harmony,
the last of which was adopted by the authorities of the Moscow
Conservatory. He was also music critic for two journals.

Tchaikovsky competed for the best musical setting for Polovsky’s
“Wakula the Smith” in a competition, and won the first two prizes.
On the production of this in Petrograd, in November, 1876, however,
only a small measure of success was gained. A greater success came to
the composer with the production of the “Oprischnik.” From 1878 on he
devoted himself exclusively to composition.

On July 6, 1877, Tchaikovsky married. It was a most unfortunate match
and rapidly developed into a catastrophe. Tchaikovsky had too much
temperament--result, many stormy scenes. A separation occurred in
October. Tchaikovsky became morose, and finally left Moscow to make his
home in Petrograd. He fell ill there and attempted to commit suicide by
standing up to his chin in the river during a cold period. He had hoped
to die from exposure, but his brother’s tender care saved his life.

Tchaikovsky had begun work on the opera, “Eugen Onegin,” in 1877. This
work was produced at the Moscow Conservatory in March, 1879, and it was
then that real success first came to him.

In the meanwhile, however, Tchaikovsky went to Clarens to recuperate
from his illness. He remained abroad for several months, visiting Italy
and Switzerland, and moving restlessly from one place to another.

In 1878 he accepted the post of director of the Russian Musical
Department at the Paris Exhibition. He resigned this later on. In 1879
he wrote his “Maid of Orleans,” which was produced in 1880. During
the next five years he continued his travels, working all the time
at composition. For some time he lived in retirement at Klin, where
his generosity to the poor made him much loved. In 1888 and 1889 he
appeared at the London Philharmonic concerts. He also visited America,
conducting his own compositions in New York City at the opening of
Carnegie Hall in 1891. In 1893 Cambridge University made him a doctor
of music. In the same year he died from an attack of cholera at
Petrograd, on November 6.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 4, No. 18, SERIAL No. 118
    COPYRIGHT, 1916, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: NICHOLAS ANDREIEVICH RIMSKY-KORSAKOV]




_RUSSIAN MUSIC_

_Nicholas Andreievich Rimsky-Korsakov_

FIVE


Rimsky-Korsakov was one of the many Russian composers who took up a
musical career after a future had been planned along the line of some
other work. In his case the Navy lost where music gained. Nicholas
Andreievich Rimsky-Korsakov was born March 18, 1844, at Tikhvin,
Russia. He had the good fortune to spend his early life in the country,
and at the same time to hear from infancy the best music. On the estate
of his father were four Jews, who formed a little band. This band
supplied music at all social functions that took place at the Korsakov
home. He began to study the piano when he was six years old, and three
years later he was improvising.

The boy’s parents, although they were glad to have him study music,
planned a naval career for him. When he was twelve years old, in 1856,
he was sent to the Petrograd Naval College. While studying there,
however, he continued his music. In 1861 he began to take his musical
studies very seriously. The following year, however, he had to conclude
his naval education with a three years’ cruise in foreign waters. When
this cruise was over, in 1865, a symphony that he had composed had its
first performance. This symphony bears the distinction of being the
first musical work in that form by a Russian composer.

In 1866 began Korsakov’s friendship with Moussorgsky, which lasted
until the latter’s death in 1881. From then on, for the next few years,
he worked hard at musical composition. It was during this time that he
first began to turn his attention to opera, of which “Pskovitianka,”
begun in 1870, was the first. In 1871 Rimsky-Korsakov was appointed a
professor in the Conservatory at Petrograd. Two years later he decided
to sever his connection with the Navy altogether. This year also saw
the beginning of his collection of folk songs, which were published in
1877. The year before this, Korsakov had married. His wife was Nadejda
Pourgold, the talented Russian pianist.

In 1874 the composer was made director of the Free School of Music at
Petrograd, which position he filled until 1881. His second opera, “A
Night in May,” was finished in 1878. He began another opera, “The Snow
Maiden,” two years later. His operas, however, always attracted less
attention abroad than his symphonies.

In 1883 he was appointed assistant director of the Imperial Chapel
at Petrograd. This post was held by him for eleven years. Two years
later he was offered the directorship of the Conservatory in Moscow,
but he declined it. In 1886 he became director of the Russian symphony
concerts. Three years later he appeared in Paris and conducted two
concerts. He was enthusiastically received, and entertained at a
banquet.

In 1894 Rimsky-Korsakov gave up the assistant directorship of the
Imperial Chapel. He was now at work upon an opera in which the
element of humor predominated. This was “Christmas Eve Revels.” It
was produced at the Maryinsky Theater in Petrograd in 1895. Korsakov
continued to work at opera, producing, among others, “Sadko,” “The
Czar’s Betrothed,” “The Tale of Czar Saltan,” “Servilia,” “Kostchei
the Deathless,” “Pan Voyvoda,” and “Kitej.” His last opera, “The
Golden Cock,” was censored during the interval between its composition
and the composer’s death. It was not until May, 1910, that it was
produced at Moscow. It is supposed that chagrin at the fate of this
opera contributed to the suddenness of Rimsky-Korsakov’s death, which
occurred on June 20, 1908.

“In him we see,” says one writer, “the Russian who, though not by any
means satisfied with Russia as he finds it, does not set himself to
hurl a series of passionate but ineffective indictments against things
as they are, but who raises an ideal and does his utmost to show how
best that ideal may be attained.”

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 4, No. 18, SERIAL No. 118
    COPYRIGHT, 1916, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: IGOR STRAVINSKY]




_RUSSIAN MUSIC_

_Igor Stravinsky_

SIX


Igor Stravinsky was a pupil of Rimsky-Korsakov. One day the young
composer played for his teacher a few bars of the music of one of his
ballets. The older man halted him suddenly: “Look here,” said he.
“Stop playing that horrid thing; otherwise I might begin to enjoy it!”
This ballet was one of the works that made Stravinsky famous. Igor
Stravinsky was born on June 17, 1882, at Oranienbaum, near Petrograd,
Russia. The date of his birth has been disputed, but this date is the
one given by Stravinsky himself. He was the son of Fedor Ignatievich
Stravinsky, the celebrated singer who was associated with the Imperial
(Maryinsky) Theater in Petrograd. Igor was destined to study law, but
at the age of nine he was already giving proofs of a natural musical
bent; and in particular he showed an aptitude for piano playing. To the
study of this instrument he devoted a great deal of time, under the
instruction of a pupil of Rubinstein.

In 1902, when Stravinsky was twenty years old, he met Rimsky-Korsakov
at Heidelberg--a meeting which marked an epoch in his life. The older
composer had much influence on the career of Stravinsky. Their views on
music differed greatly, however.

Stravinsky worked hard. He attended concerts, visited museums and read
widely. Rimsky-Korsakov, though alarmed at the revolutionary tendencies
of his pupil, predicted for him great success. During the years 1905
and 1906 Stravinsky worked at orchestration. At this time his friends
were members of the group surrounding Rimsky-Korsakov, including
Glazounov and César-Cui.

On January 11, 1906, Stravinsky married. Soon after his marriage he
finished a symphony which was performed in 1907 and was published
later. Following this, in 1908, came his “Scherzo Fantastique,” which
was inspired by a reading of Maeterlinck’s “Life of the Bee.”

When Rimsky-Korsakov’s daughter was married in 1908 Stravinsky sent his
composition, “Fire Works,” a symphonic fantasia, which, curiously, had
been submitted for the approval of an English manufacturer of Chinese
crackers. However, before the gift arrived by mail Rimsky-Korsakov
died. As a tribute to his master’s memory Stravinsky composed the Chant
Funèbre.

In 1909 Stravinsky wrote “The Nightingale,” a combination of opera and
ballet, based on Hans Christian Andersen’s fairy tale of the same name.
This was produced in 1914.

Then came the discovery of Stravinsky by the director of the Russian
ballet, Serge de Diaghileff. The young composer was commissioned
to write a ballet on a Russian folk story, the scenario of which
was furnished by Michel Fokine. Leon Bakst and Golovine, the scene
painters, collaborated with him. This ballet, “The Fire Bird,” was
finished on May 18, 1910, and produced three weeks later. This
production established Stravinsky’s reputation in Paris.

The second of his ballets, “Petrouschka,” was completed on May 26,
1911. It was first produced in Paris in the same year. The scene of
Petrouschka is a carnival. One of the characters is a showman, and in
his booth are three animated dolls. In the center is one with pink
cheeks and a glassy stare. On one side of this is a fierce negro, and
on the other the simple Petrouschka. These three play out a tragedy of
love and jealousy, which ends with the shedding of Petrouschka’s vital
sawdust. One critic has said: “This ballet is, properly speaking, a
travesty of human passion, expressed in terms of puppet gestures and
illumined by music as expositor. The carnival music is a sheer joy,
and the incidents making a demand upon music as a depictive medium
have been treated not merely with marvelous skill, but with unfailing
instinct for the true satirical touch. ‘Petrouschka’ is, in fact,
the musical presentment of Russian fantastic humor in the second
generation.”

“The Crowning of Spring” was composed during the winter of 1912 and
1913, and was produced both in Paris and London during the following
spring and summer.

Recently Stravinsky has composed several songs which are done in
the same spirit as that in which he wrote his compositions for the
orchestra.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 4, No. 18, SERIAL No. 118
    COPYRIGHT, 1916, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




THE MENTOR · DEPARTMENT OF FINE ARTS · NOV. 1, 1916.

RUSSIAN MUSIC

By HENRY T. FINCK

_Author and Music Critic_

[Illustration: I. TCHAIKOVSKY]

[Illustration: ANTON RUBINSTEIN]

    _MENTOR GRAVURES_

    RUBINSTEIN
    MOUSSORGSKY
    TCHAIKOVSKY
    RIMSKY-KORSAKOV
    GLINKA
    STRAVINSKY

Entered as second-class matter March 10, 1913, at the postoffice at New
York, N. Y., under the act of March 3, 1879. Copyright, 1916, by The
Mentor Association, Inc.


So far as the world at large is concerned, Russian music--which has
come so much to the fore in recent years--began with Rubinstein,
who lived till 1894. There was, indeed, one other composer of note
before him--Glinka--but Glinka’s music, though very popular in Russia,
remained almost unknown in other countries, whereas Rubinstein, and,
after him, Tchaikovsky (also spelled Tschaikowsky), conquered the whole
world.

Folk music, it is needless to say, flourished many centuries before
Glinka. Folk tunes are like wild flowers, and in all countries the
composers have heard the “call of the wild” and tried to woo these
flowers and bring them to their gardens. This is particularly true of
Russia, which has an abundance of folk songs that are unsurpassed in
beauty and emotional appeal; indeed, Rubinstein and another eminent
composer, César Cui (kwee), claim absolute supremacy for their country
in the matter of national melodies. The tremendous size of the Empire,
including, as it does, one-sixth of all the land on this globe, gives
scope for an unparalleled variety of local color in songs, suggesting
the great difference in costumes and customs. Asiatic traits are
mingled with the European. Many of the songs are sad, as is to be
expected in a populace often subjected to barbarian invasions, as
well as to domestic tyranny; but perhaps an equal number are merry,
with a gaiety as extravagant as the melancholy of the songs that are
in the minor mode. As a rule, Russian peasants seem to prefer singing
in groups to solo singing. There are many singing games; some of the
current songs are of gypsy origin; and we find in the collections of
Russian folk music (the best of which have been made by Balakiref
and Rimsky-Korsakov) an endless variety, devoted to love, flattery,
grief, war, religion, etc. Eugenie Lineff’s “Peasant Songs of Great
Russia” (transcribed from phonograms) gives interesting samples and
descriptions. Lineff’s choir has been heard in America.

[Illustration: SINGING AT AN OUTDOOR SHRINE]

[Illustration: RUSSIAN PRIEST CHANTING]


_Russian Choirs and Basses_

Church music is another branch of the divine art that flourished in
Russia before the advent of the great composers. Five centuries ago the
court at Moscow already had its church choir, and some of the Czars,
including Ivan the Terrible, took a special interest in the musical
service. Peter the Great had a private choir which he even took along
on his travels.

In 1840, the French composer, Adolphe Charles Adam, on a visit to St.
Petersburg (now Petrograd) found that church music was superior to any
other kind in Russia. The choir of the Imperial Chapel sang without a
conductor and without instrumental support, yet “with a justness of
intonation of which one can have no idea.”

A specialty of this choir, which gave it a “sense of peculiar
strangeness,” was the presence of bass voices that produced a marvelous
effect by doubling the ordinary basses at the interval of an octave
below them. These voices, Adam continues, “if heard separately, would
be intolerably heavy; when they are heard in the mass the effect is
admirable.” He was moved to tears by this choir, “stirred by such
emotion as I had never felt before … the most tremendous orchestra in
the world could never give rise to this curious sensation, which was
entirely different from any that I had supposed it possible for music
to convey.”

[Illustration: RUSSIAN ORGAN GRINDER]

Similarly impressed was another French composer, Berlioz, when he heard
the Imperial Choir sing a motet for eight voices: “Out of the web of
harmonies formed by the incredibly intricate interlacing of the parts
rose sighs and vague murmurs, such as one sometimes hears in dreams.
From time to time came sounds so intense that they resembled human
cries, which tortured the mind with the weight of sudden oppression and
almost made the heart stop beating. Then the whole thing quieted down,
diminishing with divinely slow graduations to a mere breath, as though
a choir of angels was leaving the earth and gradually losing itself in
the uttermost heights of heaven.”


_Italian and French Influences_

Like all other European countries, Russia more than a century ago
succumbed to the spell of Italian music. Young men were sent to Italy
to study the art of song, while famous Italian singers and composers
visited Russia and made the public familiar with their tuneful art. It
was under the patronage of the Empress Anna that an Italian opera was
for the first time performed in the Russian capital, in 1737. She was
one of several rulers who deliberately fostered a love of art in the
minds of their subjects. Under the Empress Elizabeth music became “a
fashionable craze,” and “every great landowner started his private band
or choir.” Russia became what it still is--the place where (except in
America) traveling artists could reap their richest harvests.

[Illustration: PLAYER OF REED PIPE]

The high salaries paid tempted some of the leading Italian composers,
such as Cimarosa (Cheemahrosah), Sarti, and Paisiello (Paheeseello), to
make their home for years in Russia, where they composed and produced
their operas. Near the end of the eighteenth century French influences
also asserted themselves, but the Italians continued to predominate,
so that when the Russians themselves--in the reign of Catherine the
Great (1761-1796)--took courage and began to compose operas, Italian
tunefulness and methods were conspicuous features of them.


_Glinka, the Pioneer_

The operas of Glinka, as well as those of Rubinstein and Tchaikovsky,
betrayed the influence of Italy on Russian music. Though not the
first Russian opera composer, Michal Ivanovich Glinka is the first of
historic note. Rubinstein goes so far as to claim for him a place among
the greatest five of all composers (the others being, in his opinion,
Bach, Beethoven, Schubert and Chopin), but this is a ludicrously
patriotic exaggeration. His master work is “A Life for the Czar,”
which created a new epoch in Russian music. The hero of the plot is a
peasant, Soussanin, who, during a war between Poland and Russia, is
pressed into service as a guide by a Polish army corps. He saves the
Czar by misleading the Poles, and falls a victim to their vengeance.
In his autobiography Glinka says: “The scene where Soussanin leads the
Poles astray in the forest I read aloud while composing, and entered
so completely into the situation of my hero that I used to feel my
hair standing on end and cold shivers down my back.” It is under such
conditions that master works are created.

[Illustration: ROMANTIC DANCE]

[Illustration: A MOUJIK (PEASANT) DANCE]

Although following the conventional Italian forms, “A Life for the
Czar” is in most respects thoroughly Slavic--partly Russian, partly
Polish. While composing the score he followed the plan of using the
national music of Poland and Russia to contrast the two countries.
In some cases he used actual folk tunes, including one he overheard
a cab driver sing. In other instances he invented his own melodies,
but dyed them in the national colors. As the eminent French composer,
Alfred Bruneau (bree´-no), remarked, “by means of a harmony or a simple
orchestral touch,” Glinka “could give an air which is apparently as
Italian as possiblea penetrating perfume of Russian nationality.” By
his utilizing of folk tunes in building up works of art--he did the
same thing in his next opera, “Ruslan and Ludmilla”--Glinka entered a
path on which most of the Russian composers of his time, and later on,
followed his lead; but his influence did not stop there. He was also
the pioneer who opened up the road into the dense jungle of discords,
unusual scales, and odd rhythms, which have made much of the music by
later Russian composers seem as if written according to a new grammar.
Furthermore, Rosa Newmarch, who is the best historian in English of
Russian opera, writes that “it is impossible not to realize that the
fantastic Russian ballets of the present day owe much to Glinka’s first
introduction of Eastern dances into ‘Ruslan and Ludmilla’.”

[Illustration: MICHAL GLINKA]

Clearly, Glinka was the father of Russian opera. He wrote some good
concert pieces, too.


_Rubinstein, the Russian Mendelssohn_

Anton Rubinstein is considered to have been, next to Franz Liszt, the
greatest pianist the world has ever heard. His technical execution
was not flawless, but no one paid any attention to that, because of
the overwhelming grandeur and emotional sweep of his playing. Like
Liszt, however, he tired of the laurels of a performer, his ambition
being to become the Russian Beethoven. He got no higher, however,
than the level of Mendelssohn. Both Mendelssohn and Rubinstein were
for years extremely popular. If they are less so today, that is owing
to the superficial character of much of their music. Yet both were
great geniuses; in their master works they reached the high water mark
of musical creativeness. Rubinstein is at his best in his “Ocean”
symphony, his Persian songs, some of his chamber works for stringed
instruments, alone or with piano, two of his concertos for piano and
orchestra, and his pieces for piano alone, the number of which is 238.
Among these there are gems of the first water.

[Illustration: PEASANT WITH ACCORDION]

A Rubinstein revival is much to be desired in these days, when so few
composers are able to create new melodies. When it comes, in response
to the demands of audiences, which are very partial to this composer,
at least three of his nineteen operas will be revived: “The Demon,”
“Nero,” and “The Maccabees.” Opera goers love, above all things,
melody, and Rubinstein’s operas, like his concert pieces, are full of
it. He was himself to blame for the failure of most of his operas, for
he stubbornly refused to swim with the Wagnerian current, which swept
everything before it. He hated Wagner intensely, yet he might have
learned from him the art of writing music dramas of permanent value.

Five of his operas are on Biblical subjects. They are really oratorios
with scenery, action and costumes. He dreamed of erecting a special
theater somewhere for the production of these “sacred operas,” as
Wagner did for his music dramas at Bayreuth; but nothing came of this
plan, and he became more and more embittered as he grew older, because
so many of his schemes failed.

Apart from their abundant melody there is nothing in Rubinstein’s best
works that fascinates us more than the exhibits of glowing Oriental and
Hebrew “coloring”--as we call it for want of a better word. He also
made excellent use of national Russian melodies, though not nearly to
the same extent as Glinka and his followers, the “nationalists.” Before
considering them it will be advisable to speak of the greatest of all
the Russian composers.

[Illustration: MUSIC AMONG THE LOWLY]


_Tchaikovsky, the Melancholy_

It is commonly believed that in music the public wants something
“quick and devilish”; but this is far from the truth. For social,
political, and especially climatic reasons, the Russians, with their
long and dreary winters, are supposed to be a melancholy nation. The
most melancholy of their composers is Peter Ilich Tchaikovsky, and
of his works the most popular by far, throughout the world, is the
most lugubrious of them all, the heart rending “Pathetic Symphony,”
which is today second in popularity to no other orchestral work of
any country. “All hope abandon, ye who enter here,” might well be its
motto. More than any funeral march ever composed, it embodies, in the
_adagio lamentoso_, which ends it, the concentrated quintessence of
despair, “the luxury of woe.” It was Tchaikovsky’s symphonic swan song.
At the time of his death there was a rumor that he had written it
deliberately as his own dirge before committing suicide; but it is now
known that he died of cholera.

What endears the “Pathetic Symphony” to such a multitude of music
lovers is, furthermore, its abundance of soulful melody. This abundance
characterizes many of his other compositions. Indeed, so conspicuous,
so ingratiating, is the flow of melody in his works, that one might
think he was one of those Italian masters who made their home in
Russia. It must be borne in mind, however, that the Italians have
not a monopoly of melodists--think of the Austrians, Haydn, Mozart
(who was the idol of Tchaikovsky’s youth) and Schubert; the Germans,
Bach, Beethoven, Schumann, Wagner; the Frenchmen, Bizet and Gounod;
the Norwegian, Grieg; the Pole, Chopin. With them as a melodist ranks
Tchaikovsky, and this is the highest praise that could be bestowed on
him. The charm of original melody gives distinction to his songs, the
best of which are the “Spanish Serenade,” “None but a Lonely Heart,”
and “Why So Pale Are the Roses?”

[Illustration: STREET MUSICIANS]

[Illustration: THE MUSIC LESSON]

There is less of it in his piano pieces, but his first concerto for
piano and orchestra, and his violin concerto, have an abundance of it
and are therefore popular favorites--as much as his “Slavic March,”
his “1812” overture, and his “Nut Cracker Suite,” which is also full
of quaint humor, and which had the distinction of introducing a new
instrument now much used in orchestras--the “celesta”--a small keyboard
instrument, the hammers of which strike thin plates of steel, producing
silvery bell-like tones. This suite consists of pieces taken from his
ballet of the same name.

Among his stage works are eight operas, only two of which, “Eugene
Onegin” and “The Queen of Spades,” have, however, been successful
outside of Russia; but in Russia the first named has long been second
in popularity only to “A Life for the Czar.”


_Moussorgsky and Musical Nihilism_

[Illustration: MODESTE PETROVICH MOUSSORGSKY]

One of the works most frequently performed at the Metropolitan Opera
House in New York during the last three seasons has been the “Boris
Godounov” of Modeste Petrovich Moussorgsky. It is concerned with
one of the most tragic incidents in the history of Russia. Boris
Godounov usurps the imperial crown after assassinating the Czar’s
younger brother, Dimitri. After he has ruled some years, he is driven
to insanity by the appearance of a young monk who pretends to be
Dimitri, rescued at the last moment and brought up in a monastery.
In setting this plot to music Moussorgsky adopted the principles of
musical “nihilism,” which consisted in deliberately disregarding the
established operatic order of things. The musical interest centers
chiefly in the choruses, leaving little for the soloists, apart
from dramatic action. Moussorgsky not only liked what was “coarse,
unpolished and ugly,” as Tchaikovsky put it, but he refused to submit
to the necessary discipline of musical training, the result being that
not only “Boris Godounov,” but his next opera, “Kovanstchina,” could
not be staged successfully until Rimsky-Korsakov had thoroughly revised
them, especially in regard to harmonic treatment and orchestration. The
charm of “Boris” lies in the pictures it presents of Russian life, and
its echoes of folk music.

[Illustration: PEASANTS IN MOSCOW

Listening to public band concert]

Of the songs by its composer few have become known outside of Russia.
Some are satirical--he has been called the “Juvenal of musicians”--and
it has been said of his lyrics in general that “had the realistic
schools of painting and fiction never come into being we might still
construct from Moussorgsky’s songs the whole psychology of Russian
life.”


_Rimsky-Korsakov and the Nationalists_

Moussorgsky and the man who helped to make his inspired but
ungrammatical works presentable to the world--Nicholas Andreievich
Rimsky-Korsakov--belonged to a coterie of composers known as the
nationalists. The other three were Balakiref, whose output as a
composer was small, but whose two collections of Russian folk tunes
are considered the best in existence; Borodin, who is best known in
this country through an orchestral piece called “In the Steppes of
Central Asia” and his “Prince Igor,” which has been produced at the
Metropolitan Opera House, and César Cui, who is more interesting as
a writer than as a composer. He has well set forth the tenets of the
“nationalists,” chief of which is that a composer cannot be a truly
patriotic Russian master unless he uses folk tunes as the bricks for
building up his works.

[Illustration: MILI BALAKIREF]

[Illustration: RIMSKY-KORSAKOV]

[Illustration: ALEXANDER P. BORODIN]

Because Rubinstein and Tchaikovsky did not do this to any extent
these nationalists looked down on them, and decried them as
cosmopolitans--belonging to the world rather than to Russia.
Rubinstein, who had a caustic pen, retorted by declaring that
the nationalists borrowed folk tunes because they were unable to
invent good melodies of their own. To a certain extent this was
true, but it does not apply to Rimsky-Korsakov, who is, next to
Rubinstein and Tchaikovsky, the greatest of the Russian melodists
and composers. Theodore Thomas considered him the greatest of them
all. With this opinion few will agree, but no one can fail to admire
the glowing colors of his orchestral works, the greatest of which
is “Scheherazade,” which is based on “The Arabian Nights,” and is
concerned with Sinbad’s vessel and Bagdad. Of his dozen or more operas
none has become acclimated outside of Russia. As a teacher he might
be called the Russian Liszt, because not a few of his pupils acquired
national and international fame; among them Glazounov, Liadov, Arensky,
Ippolitov-Ivanov, Gretchaninov, Taneiev (tah-nay-ev) and Stravinsky.


_Stravinsky and the Russian Ballet_

Four of the most prominent Russian composers have visited America:
Rubinstein, Tchaikovsky, Rachmaninov and Scriabin. Rachmaninov,
the only one of the four still living, owed the beginning of his
international fame to the great charm of his preludes for piano.
Scriabin was one of the musical “anarchists” who now abound in
Europe--composers who try to be “different” at any cost of law, order,
tradition and beauty. One of his quaint conceits was an attempt to
combine perfume and colored lights with orchestral sounds. Musical
frightfulness is rampant in some of his symphonies, in which horrible
dissonances clash fiercely and “without warning.”

[Illustration: ALEXANDER GLAZOUNOV]

[Illustration: ALEXANDER SCRIABIN]

The latest of the Russians who has come to the fore--Igor
Stravinsky--also revels in dissonances, but in his case they are not
only excusable but even fascinating, because there is a reason behind
them. He uses them to illustrate and emphasize humorous, grotesque or
fantastic plots and details, such as are presented in his pantomimic
ballets, “Petrouschka,” and “The Fire Bird.” There is an entirely new
musical “atmosphere” in these two works, and the public, as well as the
critics, have taken to them as ducks do to water. If the Diaghileff
Ballet Russe which toured the United States last season had done
nothing but produce these two entertainments, it would have been worth
their while to cross the Atlantic. They have made the world acquainted
with a Russian who may appeal, in his way, as strongly as Rubinstein
and Tchaikovsky. His latest efforts are reported to be in the direction
of the cult of ugliness for its own sake. But perhaps he will get over
that--or, maybe some of us will come to like ugliness in music as we
do in bulldogs. Opinions as to what is ugly or beautiful in music have
changed frequently.

[Illustration: CÉSAR A. CUI]

[Illustration: SERGEI RACHMANINOV]


_The Character of Russian Music_

The musical character of the great masters is unmistakable. When an
expert hears a piece by a famous composer for the first time he can
usually guess who wrote it. But when it comes to judging the _national_
source of an unfamiliar piece, the problem is puzzling. It is true that
Italian music usually betrays its country. Widely as Verdi and Puccini
differ from Rossini and Donizetti, they have unmistakable traits in
common. The same cannot be said of the French masters, or the German.
Gounod and Berlioz, both French composers, are as widely apart as the
poles. Flotow, who composed “Martha,” was a German, but his opera is as
utterly unlike Wagner’s “Tristan and Isolde” as two things can be.

The question, “What are the characteristics of Russian music?” is, for
similar reasons, difficult to answer. As in other countries, there
are as many styles of music as there are great composers. Moreover,
Rubinstein is less like any other Russian than he is like the German
Mendelssohn. If a “composite portrait” could be made of the works of
prominent Russian composers, it might, nevertheless, give some idea
of their general characteristics. Tchaikovsky’s passionate melody,
reinforced by inspired passages from Rimsky-Korsakov and by the tuneful
strains of Rubinstein, would give prominence to what is best in Russian
music. A more distinct race trait is the partiality of Russian masters
for deeply despondent strains, alternating with fierce outbursts of
unrestrained hilarity, clothed in garish, barbaric orchestral colors.
In startling contrast with the alluring charms of Rubinstein’s Oriental
and Semitic traits are the harsh dissonances of Moussorgsky, Scriabin,
and Stravinsky. Blending all these traits in our composite musical
portrait, with a rich infusion of folk-songs of diverse types, both
Asiatic and European, we glimpse the main characteristics of Russian
music.

[Illustration: MAKERS OF THE RUSSIAN BALLET

From left to right--Leonide Massine, dancer; Leon Bakst, costume and
scene designer, and Igor Stravinsky, composer]


_SUPPLEMENTARY READING_

    A SHORT HISTORY OF RUSSIAN MUSIC            _By Arthur Pougin_

    THE RUSSIAN OPERA                           _By Rosa Newmarch_

    THE LIFE AND LETTERS OF TCHAIKOVSKY   _By Modeste Tchaikovsky_

    ANTON RUBINSTEIN’S AUTOBIOGRAPHY

    PEASANT SONGS OF GREAT RUSSIA              _By Eugenie Lineff_

    A HISTORY OF RUSSIAN MUSIC              _By M. Montagu-Nathan_




_THE OPEN LETTER_


[Illustration: RUSSIAN BALLET

A scene from “Soleil de Nuit,” one of Serge de Diaghileff’s ballets.
The ballet was arranged by Massine, who occupies the center of the
group. The music is by Rimsky-Korsakov, and the scenery and costumes
were designed by Leon Bakst’s favorite pupil, M. Larionoff]

Russian composers of our time are in luck. A wealthy timber merchant
named Balaiev (bah-lah-ee-ev) appointed himself their special patron a
number of years ago. In 1885 he founded a publishing house at Leipzig,
and spent large sums of money printing the works of Russian composers
and financing productions of Russian music all over the world.

       *       *       *       *       *

In America the missionary work has been carried on in a number of
ways. Rubinstein toured the States in 1872, and gave 215 concerts,
which created a tremendous sensation and drew attention to Russian
compositions. Tchaikovsky visited America as the special guest of
the festival given in celebration of the opening of Carnegie Music
Hall in 1891, and during his visit, many pieces of Russian music
were performed. Slivinsky, the pianist, made a tour of America, and
Chaliapin, the celebrated Russian bass, appeared for one season at
the Metropolitan Opera House. For several years the oldest orchestra
of America, the New York Philharmonic, had for its conductor one
of Russia’s leading musicians, Wassilly Safonoff, who frequently
introduced novelties from Russia into his programs. On a larger scale,
Russian standard works have been performed in New York City and on tour
in America, by the Russian Symphony Orchestra, which was founded in
1893 and conducted by Modest Altschuler.

       *       *       *       *       *

During the 90’s, Mme. Lineff brought over the large Russian choir that
made Americans acquainted with their peasant songs and their unique
way of singing them. Then came the Balalaika Orchestra. The Balalaika
is the Czar’s favorite instrument, and the Imperial Balalaika Band,
which came to the United States by the Czar’s permission, devoted
itself largely to Russian folk music. Several of the numbers played,
especially the “Song of the Volga Bargemen,” made a sensational success
in concert. The Balalaika is used to accompany folk songs in the manner
of a guitar, but the Balalaika has a triangular body and only three
strings, which are made to vibrate like those of a mandolin.

And now we have the Russian Ballet, made familiar to the American
public by the famous dancer Pavlowa, and, within the last year, by the
Diaghileff Ballet Company, of which the leading spirits are Stravinsky,
the composer; Leon Bakst, the master designer, and Massine, the
accomplished actor-dancer. Surely the day of Russian music has come.

[Illustration: W. D. Moffat

EDITOR]




THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION


ESTABLISHED FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF A POPULAR INTEREST IN ART,
LITERATURE, SCIENCE, HISTORY, NATURE, AND TRAVEL

THE MENTOR IS PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH

BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC., AT 52 EAST NINETEENTH STREET, NEW
YORK, N. Y. SUBSCRIPTION, THREE DOLLARS A YEAR. FOREIGN POSTAGE 75
CENTS EXTRA. CANADIAN POSTAGE 50 CENTS EXTRA. SINGLE COPIES FIFTEEN
CENTS. PRESIDENT, THOMAS H. BECK; VICE-PRESIDENT, WALTER P. TEN
EYCK; SECRETARY, W. D. MOFFAT; TREASURER, ROBERT M. DONALDSON; ASST.
TREASURER AND ASST. SECRETARY, J. S. CAMPBELL

       *       *       *       *       *

COMPLETE YOUR MENTOR LIBRARY

Subscriptions always begin with the current issue. The following
numbers of The Mentor Course, already issued, will be sent postpaid at
the rate of fifteen cents each.

    Serial
    No.
      1. Beautiful Children in Art
      2. Makers of American Poetry
      3. Washington, the Capital
      4. Beautiful Women in Art
      5. Romantic Ireland
      6. Masters of Music
      7. Natural Wonders of America
      8. Pictures We Love to Live With
      9. The Conquest of the Peaks
     10. Scotland, the Land of Song and Scenery
     11. Cherubs in Art
     12. Statues With a Story
     13. The Discoverers
     14. London
     15. The Story of Panama
     16. American Birds of Beauty
     17. Dutch Masterpieces
     18. Paris, the Incomparable
     19. Flowers of Decoration
     20. Makers of American Humor
     21. American Sea Painters
     22. The Explorers
     23. Sporting Vacations
     24. Switzerland: The Land of Scenic Splendors
     25. American Novelists
     26. American Landscape Painters
     27. Venice, the Island City
     28. The Wife in Art
     29. Great American Inventors
     30. Furniture and Its Makers
     31. Spain and Gibraltar
     32. Historic Spots of America
     33. Beautiful Buildings of the World
     34. Game Birds of America
     35. The Contest for North America
     36. Famous American Sculptors
     37. The Conquest of the Poles
     38. Napoleon
     39. The Mediterranean
     40. Angels in Art
     41. Famous Composers
     42. Egypt, the Land of Mystery
     43. The Revolution
     44. Famous English Poets
     45. Makers of American Art
     46. The Ruins of Rome
     47. Makers of Modern Opera
     48. Dürer and Holbein
     49. Vienna, the Queen City
     50. Ancient Athens
     51. The Barbizon Painters
     52. Abraham Lincoln
     53. George Washington
     54. Mexico
     55. Famous American Women Painters
     56. The Conquest of the Air
     57. Court Painters of France
     58. Holland
     59. Our Feathered Friends
     60. Glacier National Park
     61. Michelangelo
     62. American Colonial Furniture
     63. American Wild Flowers
     64. Gothic Architecture
     65. The Story of the Rhine
     66. Shakespeare
     67. American Mural Painters
     68. Celebrated Animal Characters
     69. Japan
     70. The Story of the French Revolution
     71. Rugs and Rug Making
     72. Alaska
     73. Charles Dickens
     74. Grecian Masterpieces
     75. Fathers of the Constitution
     76. Masters of the Piano
     77. American Historic Homes
     78. Beauty Spots of India
     79. Etchers and Etching
     80. Oliver Cromwell
     81. China
     82. Favorite Trees
     83. Yellowstone National Park
     84. Famous Women Writers of England
     85. Painters of Western Life
     86. China and Pottery of Our Forefathers
     87. The Story of The American Railroad
     88. Butterflies
     89. The Philippines
     90. The Louvre
     91. William M. Thackeray
     92. Grand Canyon of Arizona
     93. Architecture in American Country Homes
     94. The Story of The Danube
     95. Animals in Art
     96. The Holy Land
     97. John Milton
     98. Joan of Arc
     99. Furniture of the Revolutionary Period
    100. The Ring of the Nibelung
    101. The Golden Age of Greece
    102. Chinese Rugs
    103. The War of 1812
    104. The National Gallery, London
    105. Masters of the Violin
    106. American Pioneer Prose Writers
    107. Old Silver
    108. Shakespeare’s Country
    109. Historic Gardens of New England
    110. The Weather
    111. American Poets of the Soil
    112. Argentina
    113. Game Animals of America
    114. Raphael
    115. Walter Scott
    116. The Yosemite Valley
    117. John Paul Jones

       *       *       *       *       *

NUMBERS TO FOLLOW

November 15. CHILE. _By E. M. Newman, Lecturer and Traveler._

December 1. REMBRANDT. _By John C. Van Dyke, Professor of the History
of Art, Rutgers College._

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, Inc., 52 East Nineteenth Street, New York, N. Y.

Statement of the ownership, management, circulation, etc., required
by the Act of Congress of August 24, 1912, of The Mentor, published
semi-monthly at New York, N. Y., for October 1, 1916, State of New
York, County of New York, ss. Before me, a Notary Public in and for
the State and county aforesaid, personally appeared Thomas H. Beck,
who, having been duly sworn according to law, deposes and says that
he is the Publisher of The Mentor, and that the following is, to the
best of his knowledge and belief, a true statement of the ownership,
management, etc., of the aforesaid publication for the date shown in
the above caption, required by the Act of August 24, 1912, embodied in
section 443, Postal Laws and Regulations, to wit: (1) That the names
and addresses of the publisher, editor, managing editor, and business
manager are: Publisher, Thomas H. Beck, 52 East 19th Street, New
York; Editor, W. D. Moffat, 52 East 19th Street, New York; Managing
Editor, W. D. Moffat, 52 East 19th Street, New York; Business Manager,
Thomas H. Beck, 52 East 19th Street, New York. (2) That the owners
are: American Lithographic Company, 52 East 19th Street, New York; C.
Eddy, L. Ettlinger, J. P. Knapp, C. K. Mills, 52 East 19th Street,
New York; M. C. Herczog, 28 West 10th Street, New York; William T.
Harris, Villa Nova, Pa.; Mrs. M. E. Heppenheimer, 51 East 58th Street,
New York; Emillie Schumacher, Executrix for Luise E. Schumacher and
Walter L. Schumacher, Mount Vernon, N. Y., Samuel Untermyer, 37 Wall
Street, New York. (3) That the known bondholders, mortgagees, and other
security holders owning or holding 1 per cent or more of total amount
of bonds, mortgages, or other securities, are: None. (4) That the two
paragraphs next above, giving the names of the owners, stockholders,
and security holders, if any, contain not only the list of stockholders
and security holders as they appear upon the books of the Company, but
also, in cases where the stockholder or security holder appears upon
the books of the Company as trustee or in any other fiduciary relation,
the name of the person or corporation for whom such trustee is acting,
is given; also that the said two paragraphs contain statements
embracing affiant’s full knowledge and belief as to the circumstances
and conditions under which stockholders and security holders who do
not appear upon the books of the Company as trustees, hold stock and
securities in a capacity other than that of a bona fide owner; and this
affiant has no reason to believe that any other person, association,
or corporation has any interest direct or indirect in the said stock,
bonds, or other securities than as so stated by him. Thomas H. Beck,
Publisher. Sworn to and subscribed before me this twenty-first day
of September, 1916; J. S. Campbell, Notary Public, Queens County.
Certificate filed in New York County. My commission expires March 30,
1917.

THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.

52 EAST 19th STREET, NEW YORK, N. Y.




THE MENTOR

_TO ALL MEMBERS_:

The Editor’s lot is not always a happy one. There are, however, many
pleasures in the task that warm the heart.

Whenever I help you--help any of our members--it pleases me
tremendously--more, indeed, than anything else I do.

I am pleased now because I have secured for you a special concession. I
have succeeded in arranging with our Directors to permit you to enroll
your friends at special rates.

_Here is the Special Holiday Offer_:

    1 Yearly subscription          $3.00
    2 One-year subscriptions        5.00
                        OR
    1 Two-year subscription         5.00

BY THIS PLAN YOU SAVE $1.00

I assured our Directors that if we made this concession it would double
the number of Christmas sales. Therefore I ask your co-operation--I beg
you to send your gift subscriptions in at once.

W. D. MOFFAT, _Editor_

THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.

52 EAST NINETEENTH STREET--NEW YORK, N. Y.

MAKE THE SPARE MOMENT COUNT





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mentor: Russian Music, Vol. 4,
Num. 18, Serial No. 118, November , by Henry T. Finck

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MENTOR: RUSSIAN MUSIC ***

***** This file should be named 51993-0.txt or 51993-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/9/9/51993/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

